---
layout: single
title: "On college admissions"
category: college
---

One interesting side effect of going to MIT is that pretty much everybody knows what the place is -- its name recognition, at least domestically, seems to be almost as good as e.g. Harvard's. For instance, I was recently on a plane back from Arizona, working on writing [HMMT](https://hmmt.co/) questions, when a couple next to me asked me what type of math I was working on. Of course, the usual difficulty in explaining math competitions to laypeople followed, and basically everyone within the row (who was, of course, listening in) became fairly confused. Eventually, at some point during the ensuing conversation, I was asked where I was attending college; after answering, everyone's confusion seemed to be suitably satisfied. Similarly, a few months back I was playing at a chess tournament, when some parents came up to me and asked variants of "I heard you got into MIT, any tips?" without any real prompting; in fact, I still don't know who most of them are or where they heard this news. Inevitably, these conversations turned to the topic of admissions, and several continued over e-mail later on.

This isn't to brag about the university I happen to attend, but rather to exemplify an interesting point: it's assumed that because I attend a "good school"<sup>TM</sup>, I must have some unique insight into successfully navigating the college admissions process. While this isn't especially true, I do think that there's a *lot* of misinformation floating around out there, whether misguided, straight up inaccurate, or... indicative of other motives. So, I figured I'd touch on the topic a bit here, if for no other reason than to provide a different perspective than the commonly accepted wisdom.

First of all, there are a [ton](http://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c172h1106464_sat_subject_test) [of](http://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c172h1085747_b_grade) [threads](http://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c172h564404_grades_aaa) [about](http://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c172h606337_sat_2400_vs_usamo_qualification) [quantitative](http://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c172h602897_big_hook) [stats](http://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c172h546109_freshmansophomore_gpa_to_attend_harvard_princeton_yale), especially ["chance threads"](http://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c172h582969_ivy_leagues__satgpa_or_aimeusamo), that crop up all over the place -- even on AoPS (if you want to kill a few hours of your life, you can see tons more these on collegeconfidential). These threads, almost invariably, completely miss the point. Let me tell you something that any admissions officer will tell you, but students choose not to believe for some reason: **there is essentially no difference between a 2200 and a 2400 on the SAT** (obviously, this applies equally well to other tests). Ok, perhaps there's some argument that the lower bound there should be closer to 2250 or whatever, but the point is the same: past a certain relatively low score, there is literally no benefit to devoting a ton of time to the test, and there is *definitely* no point to retaking a test to improve on a 2250 or whatever. I know people who retook the SAT after getting a 2370; some of them ended up getting their 2400, but basically wasted that time.

Similarly, there's not a great deal of difference between anything above a 3.7 GPA or so (i.e. mostly As with some unusual Bs); use the time you would otherwise spend agonizing over fractions of points doing something useful instead.

The point here is that colleges view quantitative data as a simple question: "are you academically qualified to be here?". If your scores show that you are, then how much you exceed the threshold by is largely irrelevant*. IMO, this is the main source of the numerous threads that pop up sometime around decisions date positing something like "how did I get rejected with a 2400 SAT?? Affirmative action kappa", dumb stories like students sending colleges rejections of rejection letters, or dumb actions like actually suing a college over being rejected. Somehow, this simple point seems to be consistently overlooked.

So what does actually get someone admitted? The overwhelming factors are *qualitative* data -- things you can't put a standardized number to. These are both things like accomplishments that can't be directly compared (e.g. AIME qualification is good, USAMO qualification is great, national debate team is great -- which one of the latter two is "greater"?) and the most dreaded part of the application: the essays. 

First, some words on accomplishments/extracurriculars: if you don't care about it, neither will the college. I know it sounds overly romantic, but don't do things solely for the benefit of a college application: you'll end up viewing it as an obligation, and it probably won't end up helping your application that much anyway. That said, value to colleges is definitely a valid criteria to pay attention to -- just don't let it become the main one. 

What colleges really -- legitimately -- want to see is a *passion* for a subject. Passion is something that's technically possible to fake, but frankly it's easier to do something you're passionate about in the first place. Besides the criteria of tangential relevance, there's not a whole lot of difference between activities (e.g. passion for video games is not necessarily interesting to colleges, but passion for math and passion for sports are probably weighted nearly equally). Obviously, the level of achievement matters as well, but the passion and dedication to something is far more important. Many people were surprised when I told them I basically only did math and chess in high school, since the stereotypical picture of a top applicant is one with a ton of different clubs/activities; what they presumably didn't realize was that I was putting the equivalent to a part time's job worth of hours into those activities. That's far more important than getting your name on the NHS membership rolls for application season.

Ok, on to essays. College essays are not very well understood by students in general (probably myself included), but it seems like this issue is exacerbated on AoPS (which is understandable, since most AoPSers prefer math to writing). The highly subjective nature of what makes a "good" essay -- let alone a college essay -- doesn't help either, especially since almost all applicants have no real formal training in writing (high school English doesn't count). 

So what makes a good essay? Paradoxically, you don't want to describe yourself to the reader -- despite this being the whole point of the section. Instead, you want to tell them *about* yourself, and let them fill in the blanks. This is a very subtle difference that's not too well understood by many (again, myself included); the most obvious place where it applies is telling a story illustrating something, rather than just saying that thing immediately. For example, here's the first paragraph of one of my essays (the prompt for which was "What attribute of your personality are you most proud of, and how has it impacted your life so far? This could be your creativity, effective leadership, sense of humor, integrity, or anything else you’d like to tell us about"):

> A few weeks ago, my father accidentally got a lid stuck in a pot. After some unsuccessful efforts to extricate it, he decided that the five-dollar lid wasn't worth the effort and he'd break and simply replace it. That wasn't good enough for me. After several unsuccessful approaches, I sat down and just stared at the pot for a few minutes, trying to figure out how to safely remove the lid. My parents were highly amused at the spectacle, and their amusement grew as I collected my materials: a straw, a binder clip, a rubber band, an ice pack, and a bowl of water. An hour later, it was free.

(copied verbatim to preserve historical integrity, feel free to rip it to shreds)

This type of paragraph is infinitely better than something bland like the following, even if it conveys roughly the same information:

> The personality trait of which I am most proud is my tenacity. I always work very hard to solve any problem, and I never give up until I'm completely satisfied with my solution. One illustrative example is last week, when my class was given a problem that proved too difficult for any of us to solve, including the teacher. Everyone else quickly forgot about the problem, but I couldn't accept not knowing the solution, so I spent the rest of the day trying several different methods until I finally found the answer.

Hopefully you can see why. Anyway, you can get a better illustration of this concept [here](http://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/show_dont_tell_the_college_ess). This second of the two paragraphs is more or less the reason why you occasionally hear things like "SAT perfect scorer rejected from [Ivy]", usually accompanied by passive-aggressive use of the media ("I don't want to brag about my achievements, but...") and straight up dumb comments ("...I feel I would have gotten in if colleges were a meritocracy, because that girl over there only got a 2390 on her SAT"). Did I mention that I really hate this type of media coverage? It's also probably the reason that AoPSers get rejected; most AoPSers' academic qualifications are perfectly fine.

Anyway, the main point I want to convey is that there's a pretty substantial mismatch between what people *think* admissions officers want to see, and what they *actually* want to see. In particular, the public perception seems to largely be that quantitative stats are the most important factors, and the remaining qualitative ones just need to be "good enough", when in reality the situation is almost exactly the opposite. But don't take my word for it -- listen to what [the experts say](http://mitadmissions.org/blogs)!

*(Adapted from [AoPS](https://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c87553h1132160_college))*