---
layout: single
title: "USATE and GGGg teams"
category: chess
---

I've been asked a lot about the "controversy" from USATE this year, so I wanted to quickly explain the details/my thoughts on GGGg-style teams in general.

In the last round of USATE, where my team had 4.5/5 and reasonable chances to win the tournament with a last-round win due to strong tiebreaks (though Princeton ended up going 6-0 anyway), we got paired with Chess NYC 1st Kings, a team with a (approximately) 2650/2400/2400/1250 lineup. Historically, this team would not have been allowed, because for many years there was a rule that consecutive boards had to be within 1000 points of each other. When that rule was removed -- due to some scholastic teams legitimately having lineups like 2 serious players bringing their friends along -- whatever pairing software was used for the tournament could not be updated (for whatever reason), and so this team was listed and paired with an average rating of 2216 (due to setting the ~1250 at ~1400).

So, to be clear, the team is legal and nobody did anything "wrong" (at least, certainly not the players on the team). However, moving off of objectivity and on to my own opinion, I strongly believe such a team is wildly unfair for several reasons.

First of all, even ignoring the rating distribution, being the top seed at such a tournament (which naturally one is, being 2216 in an u2200 event) is a substantial advantage due to avoiding most/all of the top few teams (in particular, the ones that construct themselves specifically to be 2199). Considering this is now the second year in a row that this team exists, it essentially amounts to exploitation of a software bug which doesn't exactly sit right with me.

More importantly, this team is basically unbeatable except in rather surprising circumstances, especially when the team has white. Imagine yourself playing a 3-game match against someone 300 points higher rated than yourself. How often do you think you can make an even score? Some back-of-the-envelope calculations based on Elo suggests it's about a 6.5% chance. So essentially every round is a foregone conclusion before it even starts -- the best the opposing team can reasonably hope for is to escape with a tied match. Unsurprisingly, this team hasn't lost a match in either year it's played; this year, the only draw they gave up came from the 2650 drawing a sub-2200 and one of the 2400s drawing a 2000. That's hard to find in an entire open tournament, let alone a single match! Of course, their success partially comes from the "1250" never playing any other tournament and thus being massively underrated, which has bailed them out of a couple potential upsets, but it's still a virtually impossible win even if you assume that board is a free point.

All this might even still be fine in an Olympiad or something, but at least in my view, it completely defeats the purpose of USATE and most team events in general. It isn't supposed to be some super serious event where winning is everything no matter the moral cost. The whole idea is to be a social event of sorts; gather a bunch of friends and slug it out in a hilarious random battle royale where matches (and sometimes the tournament) can be decided by horrifying blunders worthy of bullet games. The fact that basically any reasonably competitive team stands a good chance at winning is precisely what makes this tournament so special, and when you run into a metaphorical wall that eliminates that chance by "random" (somewhat exploited) luck of the pairings, it shatters that spirit quite violently.

Ultimately I don't actually care that much personally; winning the tournament would be nice but it's not really what we're there for (and we would have finished behind Princeton anyway). The match was worth playing if for no other reason than watching one of the players try to slide the board over and knock over literally every single piece, necessitating a hilarious replaying of the game during which both players were commenting on certain moves of questionable quality, and another player amusingly win in an hour despite being asleep for half of it. But it still leaves a somewhat sour taste in what is otherwise the highlight tournament of the year, and I hope there are better anti-GGGg provisions than the rather rudimentary "can't have 3 GMs" going forward (not that I have great suggestions nor envy the organizers who have to deal with it!).

*(Ported from Facebook)*